KEP-5915: Standardize async trace context propagation (#5916)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-instrumentation/5915-async-trace-context-propagation/README.md

**The Problem:** Current tracing approaches often treat these asynchronous operations as entirely separate traces. There is no standard way for a controller to know *why* it is reconciling an object (i.e., which user request triggered this state).

**The Gap:** While developers can manually patch annotations, there is no agreed-upon standard for the annotation key or the semantic relationship (Child vs. Link) between the trigger and the reconciliation.

**The Impact:** Observability backends display disjointed traces. Users cannot see the End-to-End (E2E) lifecycle of a resource.

### Goals

* **Standardize the Storage:** Define a reserved annotation key (e.g., `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent`) for storing W3C TraceParent data on Kubernetes objects.
* **Standardize the Semantics:** Explicitly define Span Links (not Child Spans) as the correct OpenTelemetry primitive for asynchronous Kubernetes reconciliation.
* **Library Implementation:** Implement reusable `Inject` and `Extract` primitives in `k8s.io/component-base/tracing` to handle this logic for all controllers.

### Non-Goals

> * Modifying the Kubernetes API to add tracing context as a first-class field (this uses annotations instead).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Modifying object metadata to add tracing context as a first-class field (this uses annotations instead).
```

## Proposal

### The "Span Link" Pattern

#### Why Span Links?

In synchronous systems, Child Spans are used to represent dependency. However, in Kubernetes, the downstream action (e.g., Kubelet syncing a Pod) is asynchronous and decoupled from the API request.

Treating reconciliation as a Child Span of the API request is **incorrect** because:

1. **Latency Distortion:** It implies the API request is "blocked" until the reconciliation finishes, which breaks waterfall visualizations if the reconciliation happens minutes later.
2. **Independence:** The reconciliation loop has its own lifecycle and may be triggered by multiple events.

Therefore, I propose using [Span Links](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#span-links) (as defined in the OpenTelemetry Specification). The reconciler starts a new root span but adds a Link pointing to the Trace ID stored in the object's annotation. This preserves the causal connection ("This ran because of that") without implying a synchronous parent-child structure.

#### The Mechanism

The workflow consists of two phases: **Injection (Producer)** and **Extraction (Consumer)**.

**Phase 1: Injection (Producer)**

> When a component creates or updates an object's **spec** based on an incoming request, it is responsible for "stamping" the object with the current trace context.

Reviewer: Not sure how broadly "components" is meant here. I assume users calling the API are also responsible for stamping objects if they are making updates in the context of a span?

**When to inject:**
- Creating a new object (e.g., API Server creates a Pod from user request)
- Updating the **spec** (e.g., changing a Deployment's replica count, updating a label)
- Making semantic changes that represent user intent or control plane decisions

**When NOT to inject:**
- Updating **status** fields (e.g., Pod phase transitions, condition updates)
- Heartbeats or leader election updates

> - Internal housekeeping that doesn't represent a new "action"

Reviewer: an example would be helpful here as well

- **Controllers**: When creating child objects or making control plane decisions (e.g., Deployment Controller creating ReplicaSets, ReplicaSet Controller creating Pods)
- **Mutating Admission Webhooks**: Could inject context when modifying objects (though not recommended as primary approach - see Alternatives section)

Each component that creates or updates an object's spec should call `tracing.InjectContext()` with its current context before persisting the object.

* **Trigger:** Incoming API Request (with W3C `traceparent` header).
* **Action:**
  1. OpenTelemetry middleware extracts `traceparent` from HTTP headers and propagates it into the Go `context.Context`.
  2. Component code (API Server, Controller) calls `tracing.InjectContext(ctx, obj, propagator)`.
  3. The `InjectContext()` function extracts trace context from the Go `context.Context` and writes it to the object's annotations (`tracing.k8s.io/traceparent`).
  4. Persist the object to etcd with the annotation.

**Phase 2: Extraction (Consumer)**

When a controller (Scheduler, Kubelet, Custom Operator) picks up an object from a generic informer/watch:

* **Trigger:** Reconcile Loop starts.
* **Action:**

>   1. Controller code calls `tracing.StartReconcileSpan(ctx, "ReconcilePod", pod, tracer, propagator)`.

Reviewer: We can probably write a wrapper around the trace SDK to change parent contexts to links so we don't need a different API function.

>   2. The `StartReconcileSpan()` function checks the object's annotations for `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent`.

Reviewer: We probably want to only extract the context from the object once, but we might want to start multiple spans.

>   3. If present: The function extracts the `traceparent` value and creates a **New Root Span** with a **Span Link** to the stored trace ID.

Reviewer: (Just so I don't forget).  We should implement a custom sampler that samples based on whether any span links were sampled. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/96950677ce9e8aab424cdddcf5f9ede86a48b07b/sdk/trace/sampling.go#L39.  This will allow us to still get "complete" linked trees of sampled or not-sampled spans even when using links.

5. In my observability backend, I can see the complete causal chain across all components, even though they operated asynchronously.

#### Story 2: Custom Controller Observability

As a developer of a custom Kubernetes operator, I want to understand why my controller is reconciling objects. By using the standard library functions:

1. My controller extracts trace context from incoming objects.
2. I can create spans linked to the original user request.
3. I gain visibility into the relationship between user actions and my controller's behavior.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

* **Multiple Writers:** Multiple components may update an object, potentially overwriting the trace context annotation. Since this KEP uses Span Links (not parent-child), this is acceptable—each update can represent a new triggering context. A future enhancement could support appending multiple trace contexts (e.g., `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent.0`, `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent.1`) to preserve the full lineage, though this adds complexity.
* **Annotation Size:** The W3C TraceParent format is compact (approximately 55 bytes), so annotation size impact is minimal.

> * **Backwards Compatibility:** Controllers that don't implement this feature will simply ignore the annotation.

Reviewer: It would be neat if we could make controllers that don't create spans still propagate context (i.e. just "passes through" annotations from one object to another). We would have to hide more of the implementation behind things like controller runtime or a mutating admission controller to make that work, though.

existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

None.

##### Unit tests

- `staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/tracing/annotation_carrier_test.go`: Tests for the AnnotationCarrier implementation
- `staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/tracing/context_propagation_test.go`: Tests for InjectContext, ExtractContext, and StartReconcileSpan functions

Target coverage: >80%

##### Integration tests

- Integration tests verifying that trace context is properly propagated through the API Server to object annotations.
- Integration tests verifying that controllers can extract and link to stored trace context.

##### e2e tests

- e2e test creating a Pod and verifying trace context flows through Scheduler and Kubelet with proper Span Links.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- [ ] Define the annotation key standard (`tracing.k8s.io/traceparent`).
- [ ] Implement helper functions in `k8s.io/component-base/tracing`.
- [ ] Add feature gate `AsyncTraceContextPropagation`.
- [ ] Unit tests for all new library functions.
- [ ] Documentation for library usage.

#### Beta

> - [ ] Adoption by at least one core component (e.g., Scheduler or Controller Manager).

Reviewer: For beta, I would like to demonstrate at least _two_ controllers working together.  E.g. scheduler and kubelet, or controller manager and kubelet, etc.  Otherwise, i'm not sure we can trust that the propagation mechanisms work reliably and don't cause issues.

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Check for `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent` annotations on objects.
- Monitor the `trace_context_annotations_injected_total` metric, filtering by `component`, `controller`, `node`, or `resource_kind` labels to identify specific sources of issues.
- Look for Span Links in trace data from the observability backend.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [X] Metrics
  - `trace_context_annotations_injected_total`: Non-zero values indicate components are injecting trace context
  - `trace_context_annotations_extracted_total`: Non-zero values indicate components are extracting and linking trace context
  - Filter by `component`, `controller`, or `resource_kind` labels to verify specific adoption
- [X] Other
  - Details: Check that objects have `tracing.k8s.io/traceparent` annotations after creation. Verify Span Links appear in the trace backend.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

This feature is for observability and does not have direct SLOs. It should not impact existing API Server SLOs.

> ###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

Reviewer: This might be a bit detailed for what we are doing, and how often it occurs. I think it is OK for this feature to not have self-obs metrics given the result can be seen from the resulting trace instrumentation.
